Skinny Pickle Barracuda

Medium

# Incorrect Gas Calculation During Cross-Chain Message Packing Leading to Underpayment by Users

## Summary
Gas consumption of messages sent via the CrossDomainMessenger contract (including both L1CrossDomainMessenger and L2CrossDomainMessenger) is calculated incorrectly: the gas usage of the relayMessage wrapper is not accounted for. As a result, the actual gas consumption of sending a message is higher than expected. Users will pay less for gas on L1, and L2 blocks may fill earlier than expected.
 This also affects gas metering via ResourceMetering: the metered gas will be lower than the actual consumed gas, and the EIP-1559-like gas pricing mechanism won’t reflect the actual demand for gas.
## Vulnerability Detail
The CrossDomainMessenger.sendMessage function is used to send cross-chain messages. Users are required to set the _minGasLimit argument, which represents the expected gas consumption of the message on the other chain. The function also computes the amount of gas required to pass the message to the other chain, which is done in the baseGas function, calculating the byte-wise cost of the message.

However, CrossDomainMessenger allows users to replay their messages on the destination chain if they fail. To achieve this, the contract wraps user messages in relayMessage calls, increasing the size of the messages. The baseGas function, however, only counts gas usage for the original message, not the relayMessage-wrapped message.

(https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2024-08-tokamak-network/blob/main/tokamak-thanos/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/universal/CrossDomainMessenger.sol#L187)
```solidity
            _gasLimit: baseGas(_message, _minGasLimit),
```

> This contradicts the intrinsic gas calculation in op-geth, which computes gas based on the entire message data:
> [(https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-geth/blob/optimism/core/state_transition.go#L75-L108)]
> ```go
> dataLen := uint64(len(data))
> // Bump the required gas by the amount of transactional data
> if dataLen > 0 {
>     ...
> }
> ```
**As a result, there’s a discrepancy between the contract and the node, causing the node to consume more gas than users pay for.**
> 
> This behavior also contradicts how the migration process works:
> 
> When migrating pre-Bedrock withdrawals, the data includes the entire message, including the relayMessage calldata.

> https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/9b9f78c6613c6ee53b93ca43c71bb74479f4b975/op-chain-ops/crossdomain/migrate.go#L55
> https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/9b9f78c6613c6ee53b93ca43c71bb74479f4b975/op-chain-ops/crossdomain/migrate.go#L73-L81

> The gas limit of migrated messages is computed based on the entire data.

> https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/9b9f78c6613c6ee53b93ca43c71bb74479f4b975/op-chain-ops/crossdomain/migrate.go#L86

 **Given the logic of paying for cross-chain messages’ gas consumption on L1, the implementation in the migration code is correct, while the implementation in CrossDomainMessenger is flawed: users should pay for the entire cross-chain message, not just the calldata executed on the other chain.**

## Impact
Since the CrossDomainMessenger contract is recommended as the primary cross-chain messaging contract and is used by both L1 and L2 bridges (when bridging ETH or ERC20 tokens), the undercounted gas will have a broad impact on the system. It will create a discrepancy in gas usage and payment between L1 and L2: on L1, users will underpay for the actual gas consumed by cross-chain messages.

_Additionally, since messages sent from L1 to L2 (via OptimismPortal.depositTransaction) are priced using an EIP-1559-like mechanism (via ResourceMetering._metered), the mechanism will fail to detect the actual gas demand, usually setting lower gas prices, while actual gas consumption will be higher._

The following bytes are excluded from gas usage counting:

1. The 4 bytes of the relayMessage selector.
2. The 32 bytes of the message nonce.
3. The 20 bytes of the sender's address.
4. The 20 bytes of the recipient's address.
5. The 32 bytes for the amount of ETH sent with the message.
6. The 32 bytes for the minimal gas limit of the nested message.

**Thus, each cross-chain message sent via the bridge or messenger will include 140 bytes that users won't pay for, but these bytes will still be processed by the node and counted in gas consumption.**

## Code Snippet
https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2024-08-tokamak-network/blob/main/tokamak-thanos/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/universal/CrossDomainMessenger.sol#L176
```solidity
function sendMessage(address _target, bytes calldata _message, uint32 _minGasLimit) external payable {
```
https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2024-08-tokamak-network/blob/main/tokamak-thanos/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/universal/CrossDomainMessenger.sol#L187
```solidity
            _gasLimit: baseGas(_message, _minGasLimit),
```
https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2024-08-tokamak-network/blob/main/tokamak-thanos/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/universal/CrossDomainMessenger.sol#L189C20-L191C14
```solidity
            _data: abi.encodeWithSelector(
                this.relayMessage.selector, messageNonce(), msg.sender, _target, msg.value, _minGasLimit, _message
            )
        });
```
## Tool used

Manual Review

## Reference link
https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2023-03-optimism-judging/issues/77

https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2023-03-optimism-judging/issues/88
## Recommendation
When counting gas limit in the CrossDomainMessenger.sendMessage function, consider counting the entire message, including the relayMessage calldata wrapping. Consider a change like that:
```diff
+        bytes memory wrappedMessage = abi.encodeWithSelector(
+            this.relayMessage.selector,
+            messageNonce(),
+            msg.sender,
+            _target,
+            msg.value,
+            _minGasLimit,
+            _message
+        );
         _sendMessage(
             OTHER_MESSENGER,
-            baseGas(_message, _minGasLimit),
+            baseGas(wrappedMessage, _minGasLimit),
             msg.value,
-            abi.encodeWithSelector(
-                this.relayMessage.selector,
-                messageNonce(),
-                msg.sender,
-                _target,
-                msg.value,
-                _minGasLimit,
-                _message
-            )
+            wrappedMessage
         );

         emit SentMessage(_target, msg.sender, _message, messageNonce(), _minGasLimit);
```