Vast Pebble Gorilla

High

# Address aliasing protection is bypassed for smart contract that triggers approveAndCall

## Summary

Address aliasing protection is bypassed for smart contract that triggers approveAndCall

## Vulnerability Detail

https://docs.optimism.io/chain/differences#address-aliasing

> When transactions are sent from L1 to L2 by an Externally Owned Account, the address of the sender of the transaction on L2 will be set to the address of the sender of the transaction on L1. However, the address of the sender of a transaction on L2 will be different if the transaction was triggered by a smart contract on L1.

> Because of the behavior of the CREATE opcode, it is possible to create a contract on both L1 and on L2 that share the same address but have different bytecode. Even though these contracts share the same address, they are fundamentally two different smart contracts and cannot be treated as the same contract. As a result, the sender of a transaction sent from L1 to L2 by a smart contract cannot be the address of the smart contract on L1 or the smart contract on L1 could act as if it were the smart contract on L2 (because the two contracts share the same address).

> To prevent this sort of impersonation, the sender of a transaction is slightly modified when a transaction is sent from L1 to L2 by a smart contract. Instead of appearing to be sent from the actual L1 contract address, the L2 transaction appears to be sent from an "aliased" version of the L1 contract address. This aliased address is a constant offset from the actual L1 contract address such that the aliased address will never conflict with any other address on L2 and the original L1 address can easily be recovered from the aliased address.

However, the user can trigger approveAndCall and then trigger the [code onApprove](https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2024-08-tokamak-network/blob/6d4cf9ea730d5b52b622f0b3afd41a35d3eba8a2/tokamak-thanos/packages/tokamak/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/OptimismPortal2.sol#L469) in the portal

```solidity

    function onApprove(
        address _owner,
        address,
        uint256 _amount,
        bytes calldata _data
    )
        external
        override
        returns (bool)
    {
        (address to, uint256 value, uint32 gasLimit, bytes calldata message) = unpackOnApproveData(_data);
        if (msg.sender == _nativeToken()) {
            _depositTransaction(_owner, to, _amount, value, gasLimit, to == address(0), message, true);
            return true;
        } else {
            return false;
        }
    }
```

then we are calling [_depositTransaction](https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2024-08-tokamak-network/blob/6d4cf9ea730d5b52b622f0b3afd41a35d3eba8a2/tokamak-thanos/packages/tokamak/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/OptimismPortal2.sol#L548)

```solidity
    address _sender,
        address _to,
        uint256 _mint,
        uint256 _value,
        uint64 _gasLimit,
        bool _isCreation,
        bytes calldata _data,
        bool _isOnApproveTrigger
    )
```

and

```solidity
 // Transform the from-address to its alias if the caller is a contract.
        address from =
            ((_sender != tx.origin) && !_isOnApproveTrigger) ? AddressAliasHelper.applyL1ToL2Alias(_sender) : _sender;

        // Compute the opaque data that will be emitted as part of the TransactionDeposited event.
        // We use opaque data so that we can update the TransactionDeposited event in the future
        // without breaking the current interface.
        bytes memory opaqueData = abi.encodePacked(_mint, _value, _gasLimit, _isCreation, _data);

```

note because the _isOnApproveTrigger is set to true, 

_sender != tx.origin will be true, but !_isOnApproveTrigger will be false 

and

```solidity
 ((_sender != tx.origin) && !_isOnApproveTrigger)
```

will be false because true && false => false,

and the address alias will not be applied if smart contract trigger approveAndCall,

## Impact

again, the docs explains it well

> Because of the behavior of the CREATE opcode, it is possible to create a contract on both L1 and on L2 that share the same address but have different bytecode. Even though these contracts share the same address, they are fundamentally two different smart contracts and cannot be treated as the same contract. As a result, the sender of a transaction sent from L1 to L2 by a smart contract cannot be the address of the smart contract on L1 or the smart contract on L1 could act as if it were the smart contract on L2 (because the two contracts share the same address).

> To prevent this sort of impersonation, the sender of a transaction is slightly modified when a transaction is sent from L1 to L2 by a smart contract. Instead of appearing to be sent from the actual L1 contract address, the L2 transaction appears to be sent from an "aliased" version of the L1 contract address. This aliased address is a constant offset from the actual L1 contract address such that the aliased address will never conflict with any other address on L2 and the original L1 address can easily be recovered from the aliased address.

but in the code that is in scope, if a smart contract that share the same address for both l1 and l2,

the owner of l1 smart contract can trigger call in l2 smart contract and bypass the address alias via approveAndCall.

## Code Snippet

https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2024-08-tokamak-network/blob/6d4cf9ea730d5b52b622f0b3afd41a35d3eba8a2/tokamak-thanos/packages/tokamak/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/OptimismPortal2.sol#L469

https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2024-08-tokamak-network/blob/6d4cf9ea730d5b52b622f0b3afd41a35d3eba8a2/tokamak-thanos/packages/tokamak/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/OptimismPortal2.sol#L548

## Tool used

Manual Review

## Recommendation

just check if the original owner (sender) has code size and if the owner that trigger approveAndCall is a smart contract, apply address alias.