Furry Tawny Mallard

High

# Bridge finalization failure due to incorrect deposit accounting

## Vulnerability Details
The vulnerability occurs in the finalizeBridgeERC20 function of the standard bridge contract, which is responsible for finalizing withdrawals of ERC20 tokens from Layer 1 (L1) to Layer 2 (L2). During the finalization process, the contract includes the following code:

```solidity
deposits[_localToken][_remoteToken] = deposits[_localToken][_remoteToken] - _amount;
```
When attempting to finalize a withdrawal, this line subtracts the amount _amount from the deposits mapping for the respective token pair (_localToken and _remoteToken). This subtraction will result in an underflow error, causing the transaction to revert.

[StandardBridge.sol#L356](https://github.com/sherlock-audit/2024-08-tokamak-network/blob/main/tokamak-thanos/packages/tokamak/contracts-bedrock/src/universal/StandardBridge.sol#L356)

## Impact
This vulnerability results in users' funds becoming stuck in the bridge, as the deposit balance on L2 is not correctly updated when bridging ERC20 tokens from L1. During finalization, when the contract tries to subtract the deposit amount from the tracked balance, it attempts to underflow the deposit balance (which remains 0), causing the transaction to revert. As a result, users are unable to complete their withdrawals on L2, leading to potential loss of access to their funds and disruption in cross-chain operations.

## Proof of Concept
This vulnerability occurs when bridging an ERC20 token from Layer 1 (L1) to Layer 2 (L2) using the Standard Bridge contract. The core issue lies in the incorrect management of the deposits mapping when attempting to finalize the bridge on L2.

The process flow is as follows:

1. **Step 1**: Initiating the ERC20 Bridge on L1
- A user initiates a bridge for an ERC20 token that is not mintable.

- The _initiateBridgeERC20 function is called in the Standard Bridge contract on L1.
- The contract checks if the token is mintable. Since the token is non-mintable, it calls IERC20(_localToken).safeTransferFrom(_from, address(this), _amount) to transfer the tokens from the user to the bridge contract.
- The contract then updates the deposits mapping, incrementing the balance of the _localToken for the corresponding _remoteToken on L2:

```solidity
deposits[_localToken][_remoteToken] = deposits[_localToken][_remoteToken] + _amount;
```

- The bridge emits the ERC20BridgeInitiated event to inform the system about the initiated bridge.
- Next, the bridge sends a message to the L2 bridge via the Optimism Messenger. This message contains information about the tokens to be bridged, the amounts, and the addresses involved.


2. **Step 2**: Relaying the Message from L1 to L2
- The message is picked up by the Optimism node, which processes it and relays the information to the L2 Standard Bridge contract.
- The L2 Standard Bridge receives the message and prepares to finalize the bridge.


3. **Step 3**: Finalizing the ERC20 Bridge on L2
- The L2 bridge attempts to execute the finalizeBridgeERC20 function, which handles the completion of the bridging process by transferring the tokens to the recipient.

However, when the finalizeBridgeERC20 function tries to update the deposits mapping by subtracting the bridged amount, it uses the following code:

```solidity
deposits[_localToken][_remoteToken] = deposits[_localToken][_remoteToken] - _amount;
```
**The problem** occurs here because, when processing on L2:

The deposits[_localToken][_remoteToken] mapping for non-mintable tokens on L2 has not been initialized or updated when tokens were sent from L1.
When the L2 contract tries to subtract the bridged amount from the deposits balance, it finds that the current value in the mapping is zero.
This subtraction causes an underflow since the contract tries to subtract _amount from zero. This leads to a revert in the transaction, which stops the bridging process, leaving the user’s funds in a stuck state.

## Code Snippet
```solidity
function finalizeBridgeERC20(
        address _localToken,
        address _remoteToken,
        address _from,
        address _to,
        uint256 _amount,
        bytes calldata _extraData
    )
        public
        virtual
        onlyOtherBridge
    {
        require(paused() == false, "StandardBridge: paused");
        if (_isOptimismMintableERC20(_localToken)) {
            require(
                _isCorrectTokenPair(_localToken, _remoteToken),
                "StandardBridge: wrong remote token for Optimism Mintable ERC20 local token"
            );

            OptimismMintableERC20(_localToken).mint(_to, _amount);
        } else {
            deposits[_localToken][_remoteToken] = deposits[_localToken][_remoteToken] - _amount;
            IERC20(_localToken).safeTransfer(_to, _amount);
        }

        // Emit the correct events. By default this will be ERC20BridgeFinalized, but child
        // contracts may override this function in order to emit legacy events as well.
        _emitERC20BridgeFinalized(_localToken, _remoteToken, _from, _to, _amount, _extraData);
    }
```
## Tool used

- Manual Review

## Recommendation
Consider removing the deposits mapping from the initiateBridgeERC20 and finalizeBridgeERC20 functions. Since users need to have enough tokens to transfer them to the bridge for these functions to be executed, eliminating the deposits mapping would improve both the clarity of the code and the overall security of the protocol ( since the functions will no longer revert ).